 
https://crsreports.congress.gov 
 
January 8, 2019
Introduction to Financial Services: The Regulatory Framework
This In Focus provides a brief introduction to the federal 
agencies that regulate U.S. financial markets. For more 
detail, see CRS Report R44918, Who Regulates Whom? An 
Overview of the U.S. Financial Regulatory Framework, by 
Marc Labonte. 
The Financial System 
Financial firms match the available funds of savers and 
investors with borrowers and others seeking to raise funds 
in exchange for future payouts. The products, instruments, 
and markets used to facilitate this matching are myriad, and 
they are overseen by a complex system of regulators. The 
financial system is often divided into banking, insurance, 
and securities markets. Securities are financial contracts 
that pledge to make payments from the issuer to the holder 
and are traded on markets. Contracts take the form of debt 
(a borrower and creditor relationship) and equity (an 
ownership relationship). 
Financial activity is inherently risky, but without risk-
taking, businesses could not expand or innovate and 
households would be unable to purchase durable goods, 
education, and housing that could not be financed out of 
current income. Financial regulation aims to balance the 
benefits of finance with the risks that it poses. 
The Financial Regulatory Framework 
Table 1 lists the federal financial regulators and whom they 
regulate. It categorizes those regulators as follows: 
 
Depository regulators—regulate institutions 
(commercial banks, thrifts (savings associations), 
and credit unions) that accept customer deposits; 
 
Securities markets regulators—regulate 
securities products, markets, and market 
participants. For regulatory purposes, securities 
markets can be divided into derivatives (whose 
value is based on an underlying commodity, 
financial indicator, or financial instrument) and 
other types of securities; 
 
Government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) 
regulators—Congress created GSEs as privately 
owned institutions with limited missions and 
charters to support the mortgage and agricultural 
credit markets. It also created dedicated regulators 
exclusively to oversee the GSEs. 
 
Consumer protection regulator—the Dodd-
Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer 
Protection Act in 2010 (Dodd-Frank Act; P.L. 
111-203) consolidated and expanded jurisdiction 
over various consumer protection laws for certain 
financial products in a newly created agency, the 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. 
These regulators regulate financial institutions, markets, 
and products using licensing, registration, rulemaking, 
supervisory, enforcement, and resolution powers.  
Other entities that play a role in financial regulation are 
self-regulatory organizations, interagency bodies, state 
regulators, and international regulatory fora. Federal 
regulators generally play a secondary role in insurance 
markets, where state regulation predominates. 
Regulatory Fragmentation 
The financial regulatory system has been described as 
fragmented, with multiple overlapping regulators and a dual 
state-federal regulatory system. The system evolved 
piecemeal, as Congress responded to emerging issues, 
punctuated by major changes in response to historical 
financial crises. The most recent financial crisis also 
resulted in changes to the regulatory system through the 
Dodd-Frank Act and the Housing and Economic Recovery 
Act of 2008 (P.L. 110-289). To address the fragmented 
nature of the system, the Dodd-Frank Act created the 
Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), a council of 
regulators and experts chaired by the Treasury Secretary. 
In practice, regulatory jurisdiction is typically based on 
charter type, not function. In other words, how and by 
whom a firm is regulated depends more on the firm’s legal 
status than the types of activities that it is conducting. This 
means that a similar activity being conducted by two 
different types of firms can be regulated differently by 
different regulators. Financial firms may be subject to more 
than one regulator because they may engage in multiple 
financial activities. For example, a firm may be overseen by 
an institution regulator and by an activity regulator when it 
engages in a regulated activity and by a market regulator 
when it participates in a regulated market.  
Drawbacks to the fragmented regulatory system are the 
potential for jurisdictional gaps, which may cause 
regulatory myopia, and overlaps, which may cause 
redundant regulation. These gaps and overlaps could be 
exploited by financial firms to elude regulation or benefit 
from a “race to the bottom” in regulatory standards between 
competing regulators. Advantages to the fragmented system 
include more specialized regulators, with a deeper and more 
targeted knowledge of firms, products, and markets. In 
addition, overlapping regulators could reduce the likelihood 
of blind spots or “group think” in regulation. 

Introduction to Financial Services: The Regulatory Framework 
https://crsreports.congress.gov 
Table 1. Federal Financial Regulators and Whom They Regulate 
Regulatory Agency 
Institutions Regulated 
Other Notable 
Authority 
Depository Regulators 
Federal Reserve 
Bank holding companies and certain subsidiaries (e.g., foreign 
subsidiaries), financial holding companies, securities holding companies, 
and savings and loan holding companies 
Primary regulator of state banks that are members of the Federal 
Reserve System, foreign banking organizations operating in the United 
States, Edge Corporations, and any firm or payment system designated 
as systemically significant by the FSOC 
Operates discount window 
(“lender of last resort”) for 
depositories; operates 
certain payment systems; 
conducts monetary policy 
Office of the Comptroller 
of the Currency (OCC) 
National banks, U.S. federal branches of foreign banks, and federally 
chartered thrift institutions 
 
Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation (FDIC) 
Federally insured depository institutions 
Primary regulator of state banks that are not members of the Federal 
Reserve System and state-chartered thrift institutions 
Operates deposit insurance 
for banks; resolves failing 
banks 
National Credit Union 
Administration (NCUA) 
Federally chartered or federally insured credit unions 
Operates deposit insurance 
for credit unions; resolves 
failing credit unions 
Securities Markets Regulators 
Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) 
Securities exchanges, broker-dealers; clearing and settlement agencies; 
investment funds, including mutual funds; investment advisers, including 
hedge funds with assets over $150 million; and investment companies 
Nationally recognized statistical rating organizations  
Security-based swap (SBS) dealers, major SBS participants, and SBS 
execution facilities 
Corporations selling securities to the public 
Approves rulemakings by 
self-regulated organizations 
Commodity Futures 
Trading Commission 
(CFTC) 
Futures exchanges, futures commission merchants, commodity pool 
operators, commodity trading advisors, derivatives, clearing 
organizations, and designated contract markets 
Swap dealers, major swap participants, swap execution facilities, and 
swap data repositories 
Approves rulemakings by 
self-regulated organizations 
Government-Sponsored Enterprise Regulators 
Federal Housing Finance 
Agency (FHFA) 
Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Federal Home Loan Banks 
Acting as conservator 
(since Sept. 2008) for 
Fannie and Freddie 
Farm Credit 
Administration (FCA) 
Farm Credit System, Farmer Mac 
 
Consumer Protection Regulator 
Consumer Financial 
Protection Bureau (CFPB) 
Nonbank mortgage-related firms, private student lenders, payday 
lenders, and larger “consumer financial entities” determined by the 
CFPB  
Statutory exemptions for certain markets 
Rulemaking authority for consumer protection for all banks; 
supervisory authority for banks with over $10 billion in assets 
 
Source: CRS Report R44918, Who Regulates Whom? An Overview of the U.S. Financial Regulatory Framework, by Marc Labonte.      
 
 
 
Marc Labonte, Specialist in Macroeconomic Policy   
IF11065

Introduction to Financial Services: The Regulatory Framework 
https://crsreports.congress.gov | IF11065 · VERSION 2 · NEW 
 
 
Disclaimer 
This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to 
congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. 
Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has 
been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the 
United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be 
reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include 
copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you 
wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 
 
