The 287(g) Program: State and Local Immigration Enforcement - EveryCRSReport.com

The 287(g) Program: State and Local Immigration Enforcement

 August 12, 2021
 IF11898

 link to page 2 

August 12, 2021

The 287(g) Program: State and Local Immigration Enforcement

Section 287(g) of the Immigration and Nationality Act 

oversight requirements that help determine which model is 

(INA), codified in 8 U.S.C. §1357(g), permits the 

the best fit for a specific locality. 

delegation of certain immigration enforcement functions to 

The JEM, implemented in 2005, allows certain trained and 

state and local law enforcement agencies. Agreements 

authorized state and local law enforcement officers to 

entered pursuant to INA §287(g) (commonly referred to as 

perform specific immigration enforcement functions, as 

§287(g) agreements) enable specially trained state or local 

outlined in their MOA. These LEA-affiliated Designated 

officers to perform specific functions relating to the 

Immigration Officers (DIOs) must complete a four-week 

investigation, apprehension, or detention of noncitizens 

training program in Charleston, SC, and a one-week 

during a predetermined time frame and under federal 

refresher training every two years. After the four-week 

oversight by the Department of Homeland Security’s 

(DHS’s)

training, they are authorized to identify noncitizens already 

 Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). 

arrested and booked into the LEA facility who have 

Although §287(g) agreements were authorized as part of the 

criminal convictions or pending criminal charges. They are 

1996 Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant 

to identify these removable noncitizens by interviewing 

Responsibility Act (P.L. 104-208, Division C, IIRIRA), the 

them and screening their biographic information against 

first §287(g) agreement was implemented in 2002 after the 

DHS databases. They can then issue detainers, serve 

law was given new urgency following the terrorist attacks 

warrants, and prepare documents for removal proceedings. 

on September 11, 2001. The number of state and local law 

The WSO model, first implemented in 2019, is narrower in 

enforcement agencies (LEAs) with §287(g) agreements 

scope than the JEM. WSOs are limited to executing 

increased to 72 in 2011 before declining to 35 by the end of 

administrative warrants for civil immigration violations to 

the Obama Administration. In 2017, President Trump 

designated noncitizens incarcerated in their LEA facility 

issued Executive Orders 13767 and 13768 directing 

who have already been identified by ICE as being 

executive agencies to encourage maximum participation of 

potentially removable. They do not interview individuals 

LEAs in the 287(g) program. During the Trump 

regarding their citizenship and removability. They undergo 

Administration, from January 2017 until September 2020, 

one day of training, either at a local site or online. The 

the number of LEAs with §287(g) agreements increased by 

WSO program is suitable for jurisdictions that lack the 

more than 300%, from 35 to 150. 

budget or personnel needed to participate in the JEM 

Memorandum of Agreement 

program or whose ability to cooperate with ICE is limited 
by state or local policies. 

To participate in the program, LEAs must contact their 
local ICE Enforcement and Removals Office (ERO) and 

Each model provides different benefits to ICE. JEM 

apply. They are to be evaluated on their available resources, 

participants are seen as a force multiplier that taps into LEA 

their record on civil rights and liberties, and their capacity 

personnel to increase ICE’s ability to identify and process 

to be a force multiplier (e.g., ICE reviews data to see the 

removable noncitizens. WSO participants reduce the time 

likelihood of the LEA encountering potentially removable 

ICE deportation officers spend traveling to serve warrants 

individuals). They must sign a Memorandum of Agreement 

by giving that authority to local officers. 

(MOA) that defines the scope and terms of the partnership, 
including training requirements, supervision requirements, 

There are two previously used but now discontinued models 

delegation of authority, and duration of the agreement. The 

for the 287(g) program: the Task Force Model and the 

agreement can be terminated by either party at any time. 

Hybrid Model. The Task Force Model allowed DIOs who 

After it expires, there is no legal obligation to renew it. 

encountered suspected noncitizens in the course of their 
daily activities to question and arrest individuals they 

While each MOA is individually negotiated between ICE 

believe violated immigration law. DIOs were able to issue 

and the LEA, there has been an effort to standardize and 

ICE detainers, arrest warrants, and search warrants, as well 

improve these agreements. In 2009, ICE created a new 

as inquire into individuals’ immigration status. The Hybrid 

MOA template and renegotiated all existing MOAs. In 

Model combined the JEM and Task Force Models. The 

2013 and 2016, the template was revised to increase 

Obama Administration announced that it would discontinue 

oversight and better align with current ICE polices . 

the Task Force Model and, thus, the Hybrid Model; the last 
of these agreements expired on December 31, 2012. 

§287(g) Models 
Currently there are two types or models of §287(g) 

Funding 

agreements for which a locality can apply: the Jail 

The 287(g) program is jointly funded by the federal 

Enforcement Model (JEM) and the Warrant Service Officer 

government and participating state and local governments. 

(WSO) model. These models have different resource and 

Federal funds cover the cost of training LEA officers, IT 
infrastructure, program management, and oversight. Figure 

https://crsreports.congress.gov 

 link to page 2 

The 287(g) Program: State and Local Immigration Enforcement 

1 shows federal funding appropriated for the 287(g) 

ICE has no formal oversight mechanism for WSO 

program, which decreased in FY2014 after the 

participants, including no policies for ICE field officers’ 

discontinuation of the Task Force and Hybrid Models in 

supervision, no inspections, and no procedures to ensure 

FY2013. 

MOA compliance. ICE field officers’ primary form of 
WSO oversight is ensuring that warrants are signed. 

State and local governments pay for other expenses, such as 
officer salaries and overtime utilized during training and/or 

Program Expansion 

while performing duties under an MOA. Localities also pay 

ICE sets an annual target number of LEAs to join the 

for administrative supplies, security equipment, and 

287(g) program but does not strategically recruit based on 

training-related expenses. Some LEA expenses related to 

the location or type of LEA. As the program is voluntary, 

detention can possibly be reimbursed by the federal 

the LEA decides whether to apply to the JEM or WSO 

government through the State Criminal Alien Assistance 

model; ICE does not as sess the number and mix of JEM 

Program (SCAAP). Some LEAs consider the 287(g) 

and WSO participants that would be most helpful to them. 

program to be too costly and do not participate, do not 
renew their agreements, or have terminated them early. 

A 2021 GAO report concluded that ICE should recruit more 
strategically to better leverage its limited resources and 

Figure 1. Appropriations for the 287(g) Program 

maximize the program’s benefits. A 2018 DHS Office of 
Inspector General report found that ICE approved new 
applicants without preparing for the increased need for 
program management staff, IT infrastructure installation, 
and monitoring of DIO training completion. This resulted in 
an increase in violations of MOAs and ICE policy, as 
reported in OPR inspections. 

Racial Profiling and Community Policing 
Past Department of Justice investigations determined that 
certain localities that had §287(g) agreements with ICE 
engaged in racial profiling, including conducting “sweeps” 
in Latino neighborhoods and unlawfully detaining and 
arresting Latinos. Those §287(g) agreements were 

subsequently terminated, which is in line with ICE’s policy 
that “if any proof of racial profiling is uncovered, that 

specific officer or department will have their authority 

Source: Department of Homeland Security, 287(g) End-of-Year 

and/or agreement rescinded.” 

Report, June 24, 2020. 
Notes: FY2006 was the first year this program received federal 

The Police Executive Research Forum, as well as the North 

appropriations. 

Carolina School of Law in conjunction with the American 
Civil Liberties Union of North Carolina, have also 

Agency Oversight 

conducted studies of the 287(g) program. They concluded 

Oversight varies depending on the program model. The 

that the program may threaten state and local law 

enforcement’s relationship with immigrant communities

JEM model has three oversight mechanisms administered 

. 

by ICE: field supervisors, biennial inspections, and 

The Major Cities Chiefs Association found that “without 

complaint resolution. JEM participants are overseen by an 

assurances that contact with the police would not result in 

ICE 287(g) program field supervisor that answers DIOs’ 

purely civil immigration enforcement action, the hard-won 

questions and addresses related issues. Field supervisors 

trust, communication and cooperation from the immigrant 

community would disappear.” T

monitor MOA compliance by conducting site visits, 

here may be a connection 

between this program and the rise in “sanctuary” 

meeting with LEA management to discuss program 
operations, and tracking DIOs’ training completion. They 

jurisdictions (for more information, see CRS In Focus 

also review and sign certain documents, such as detainers, 

IF11438, “Sanctuary” Jurisdictions: Policy Overview). 

warrants of arrest, and warrants of removal. ICE’s 287(g) 

Issues for Congress 

Inspections Unit, within the Office of Professional 
Responsibility (OPR), is to conduct biennial inspections of 

The 287(g) program garners interest from supporters who 

JEM agency participants to ensure compliance with MOAs 

want to sustain or expand the program and opponents who 

and ICE policies, and assess the field office’s oversight and 

want to curtail or abolish it. Before the rapid growth of the 

support of the LEA. Finally, ICE monitors participating 

§287(g) agreements starting in 2017, legislative proposals 

LEAs through a complaint reporting and resolution process. 

generally sought to bolster the program; however, given its 
expansion and the current concerns about law enforcement-

ICE can suspend a §287(g) agreement at any time due to 

community relations, some lawmakers have shown interest 

the LEA’s noncompliance with the MOA. ICE can also 

in bounding or even abolishing the program. 

suspend or revoke the 287(g) authorization of an individual 
officer due to misconduct (whether or not it occurred during 

Abigail F. Kolker, Analyst in Immigration Policy 

287(g)-related duties), complaints against them, or not 
completing training requirements. 

IF11898

https://crsreports.congress.gov 

The 287(g) Program: State and Local Immigration Enforcement 

Disclaimer 
This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to 
congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. 
Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has 

been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the 
United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be 
reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include 
copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permissio n of the copyright holder if you 
wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 

https://crsreports.congress.gov | IF11898 · VERSION 1 · NEW 

 Download PDF

 Download EPUB

Revision History

Aug. 12, 2021

 HTML
 · 

 PDF

Metadata

Topic areas

Immigration Policy

Report Type: CRS In Focus

Source: CRSReports.Congress.gov

Raw Metadata: JSON