Toward the Creation of a U.S. “Space Force” - EveryCRSReport.com

Toward the Creation of a U.S. “Space Force”

 August 16, 2018
 IF10950

August 16, 2018

Toward the Creation of a U.S. “Space Force”

Background 

Organizational Structure of the Military 

For over two decades, the U.S. Government Accountability 

The U.S. military is composed of three military 

Office (GAO) and others have found that fragmentation and 

departments—the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air 

overlap in national security space acquisition management 

Force—and four armed forces (the Department of the Navy 

and oversight have contributed to program delays and 

is responsible for both the Navy and the Marine Corps). 

cancellations, cost increases, and inefficient operations. 

The Secretaries of the military departments are responsible 

Congress has attempted numerous organizational and 

for organizing, training, and equipping their respective 

acquisition reforms to address these problems. In the view 

forces. 

of many observers, these efforts have generally been 
unsuccessful. 

Unified Combatant Commands (COCOMS) are 
organizationally responsible for employing these forces 

In addition to these perceived managerial deficits, Congress 

during military operations. There are currently 10 Unified 

has more recently expressed concern over the slow pace 

COCOMs, including 6 that are geographically defined (e.g., 

with which the Department of Defense (DOD) and the Air 

U.S. Central Command) and 4 that are functionally oriented 

Force have addressed the growing threat to U.S. national 

(e.g., U.S. Strategic Command.) Unified COCOMs are led 

security in space from adversaries, particularly Russia and 

by a single commander and composed of a mix of 

China, and to a lesser extent North Korea and Iran. Some in 

servicemen and women from the military departments. 

the military and elsewhere now increasingly refer to space 

as a “warfighting domain”; once seen as peaceful and 

Currently, the Air Force provides space mission capabilities 

uncontested, space is now viewed as crowded and 

for DOD, primarily through the Air Force Space Command, 

adversarial. 

which has its headquarters at Peterson Air Force Base in 
Colorado, but has additional installations around the world. 

Generally, House Members have led the effort to remove 

Section 1601 of the FY2018 NDAA (P.L. 115-91) 

institutional barriers to space acquisition reform by 

authorized the establishment of Commander, U.S. Air Force 

advocating for the creation of a new entity for national 

Space Command, and designated the commander of Air 

security space. Until recently, the Senate largely favored 

Force Space Command as the “sole authority with respect 

efforts to reform existing organizations rather than 

to … [o]rganizing, training, and equipping personnel and 

authorize new ones. However, as part of the FY2019 

operations of the space forces of the Air Force.” 

National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) deliberations, 
both chambers passed (and the President signed) legislation 

Options for Space Reorganization 

that authorized the creation of a subordinate unified 

Specific organizational options that the President or 

command known as the U.S. Space Command (under the 

Congress could implement to conduct national security 

U.S. Strategic Command). The reorganization was intended 

space operations include the following: 

to address long-standing concerns related to space 

acquisition management and sharpen DOD’s strategic focus 

Reorganization within the military services. The 

on space. 

President could direct the service secretaries to develop new 
units or restructure existing units to provide greater 

DOD recently developed a series of additional proposals 

capability and capacity to conduct space operations. Such 

that would authorize the creation of an 11th unified 

changes might involve procuring new equipment, revising 

combatant command responsible for space. Separately, the 

training strategies, and modifying organizational structures 

Trump Administration called for Congress to establish by 

and relationships. Congress could also mandate such 

2020 a new military service branch—Space Force—with 

changes by statute, or influence executive branch action 

the goal of asserting “American dominance in space.” The 

based on its oversight and appropriations powers. 

new service branch would be the first since the creation of 
the U.S. Air Force (previously part of the Army) in 1947. 

Establish a new COCOM. Using the authority of 10 

Inconsistencies between these various executive branch 

U.S.C. 161, the President could direct the establishment of 

proposals have puzzled some observers and Congress could 

a space-oriented COCOM, or a subordinate unified 

play a major role in adjudicating among them. 

combatant command under an existing COCOM (similar to 
the subordination of U.S. Forces Korea to U.S. Indo-Pacific 

Given the long-standing nature of the debate over how 

Command). Alternatively, Congress could require the 

space assets should be managed, some observers view 

establishment of a space-oriented COCOM in law, perhaps 

recent proposals as initial positions in a longer-term 

with special authorities, as it did with the establishment of 

negotiation among the part of major stake holders during 

Special Operations Command and Cyber Command (10 

next year’s NDAA and beyond. 

USC 167 and 167b). The FY2019 NDAA provided for the 

https://crsreports.congress.gov 

Toward the Creation of a U.S. “Space Force” 

establishment of a subordinate unified command, to be 

Militia of the several States, when called into the actual 

known as U.S. Space Command, under U.S. Strategic 

Service of the United States.” 

Command. 

Accordingly, the constitutional framework appears to 

New military service. Congress could establish a separate 

contemplate that the role of establishing, organizing, 

military service focused on space operations within one of 

regulating, and providing resources for the Armed Forces 

the existing military departments, in a manner similar to the 

belongs to Congress, while the President is in charge of 

way the Marine Corps exists within the Department of the 

commanding the forces Congress has established using the 

Navy. The statutory authorities required to establish such a 

funds Congress has provided. 

new service would likely resemble those used for the 
Marine Corps (various sections of Title 10, Subtitle C, 

It may conceivably be argued that congressional authority is 

including Chapter 506). 

limited to “land and naval forces,” including “Armies” and 

“the Navy” as well as the “Militia” (i.e., the reserve 

New military department. Congress could choose to 

components), and thus would not extend to a new armed 

establish a new military department with a new military 

force operating primarily in the realm of space. The 

service focused on space operations. The most recent 

President’s commander-in-chief authority is similarly 

establishment of a military department occurred in 1947, 

limited to the Army and Navy and activated reserve 

when Congress established the Department of the Air Force 

components. However, it is unclear whether a new Space 

via the National Security Act of 1947. This act also 

Force would actually carry out functions in space or that its 

transferred equipment, personnel, and installations from the 

functions would be any different from those related to space 

Army Air Corps to the newly created Air Force. The 

operations already carried out by the various services. 

statutory authorities required to establish a new department 

Given this uncertainty, it is possible that a Space Force 

would likely be similar to those used for the Army (Subtitle 

would already constitute a land and naval force under the 

B of Title 10), Navy (Subtitle C of Title 10), and Air Force 

Constitution. Finally, it is of note that respective 

(Subtitle D of Title 10). 

congressional and presidential authorities over the Air 
Force—which is not specifically mentioned in the 

Constitutional Authority to Establish a 

Constitution—have not been historically called into 

“Space Force” 

question. 

Under the Constitution, authority over the Armed Forces is 
divided between the President and Congress. Under Article 

Additional Considerations 

I, section 8, Congress has the power “To lay and collect 

Given myriad challenges to creating some new structure 

Taxes ... to ... pay the Debts and provide for the common 

around which to organize national security in space, some 

Defence,” “To raise and support Armies,” “To provide and 

in Congress are looking at previous major legislative 

maintain a Navy,” “To make rules for the Government and 

reforms. Many are focused on how best to address the 

Regulation of the land and naval Forces,” and “To provide 

challenges of solving the problems that exist today. 

for organizing, arming, and disciplining, the Militia, and for 

Previous major legislative initiatives include the creation of 

governing such Part of them as may be employed in the 

the Air Force itself, the creation of U.S. Special Operations 

Service of the United States.” Further, Congress is 

Command, Cyber Command, or even Transportation 

empowered “To make all Laws which shall be necessary 

Command. Other significant landmark bills include the 

and proper for carrying into Execution the foregoing 

Goldwater Nichols Act, the Patriot Act, and creation of the 

Powers ...” as well as “all other Powers vested by this 

Department of Homeland Security. Each of these took 

Constitution in the Government of the United States, or in 

varying amounts of time and hearings to establish (e.g., 

any Department or Officer thereof.” 

creation of the Air Force took three years of hearings), and 
most provide varying degrees of lessons learned, both good 

Congress also has virtually plenary constitutional power 

and bad. Congress may focus on previous major legislation 

over appropriations, one that is not qualified with reference 

to determine how best and how quickly to proceed toward 

to its powers in Section 8. Article I, Section 9, provides that 

reorganizing DOD and its future in space. 

“No money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in 

Consequence of Appropriations made by Law.” It is well 

Budgetary costs and personnel disruptions and 

established, as a consequence of these provisions, that “no 

opportunities are also likely to play in important ways that 

money can be paid out of the Treasury unless it has been 

could take time to fully understand. Congress has a unique 

appropriated by an act of Congress” and that Congress can 

opportunity to shape the direction of U.S. national security 

specify the terms and conditions under which an 

space at this moment in time. 

appropriation may be used, so long as the restrictions do not 
impair power inherent solely in other branches or otherwise 

Steven A. Hildreth, Coordinator, Specialist in U.S. and 

run afoul of constitutional restrictions on congressional 

Foreign National Security Programs 

prerogatives. 

Jennifer K. Elsea, Legislative Attorney 
Lawrence Kapp, Specialist in Military Manpower Policy 

Article II of the Constitution vests the President with the 

“executive Power,” and appoints him “Commander in Chief 

Kathleen J. McInnis, Specialist in International Security 

of the Army and Navy of the United States, and of the 

IF10950

https://crsreports.congress.gov 

Toward the Creation of a U.S. “Space Force” 

Disclaimer 
This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to 
congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. 
Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has 

been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the 
United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be 
reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include 
copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you 
wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 

https://crsreports.congress.gov | IF10950 · VERSION 4 · NEW 

 Download PDF

 Download EPUB

Revision History

Aug. 16, 2018

 HTML
 · 

 PDF

Metadata

Topic areas

Intelligence and National Security

National Defense

Report Type: CRS In Focus

Source: CRSReports.Congress.gov

Raw Metadata: JSON